#  Deterrence and Compellence

## Iraq invaded Kuwait in August of 1990
The US was half hearted in its attempts to deter Iraq from using force against Kuwait and to reassure Iraq of it’s benign intentions.  Stein asks whether the US would have been successful in deterring Iraq before invading Kuwait, had the United States been more serious about the issue.  Moreover, after the occupation of Kuwait, the US assembled a large international coalition that signified the use of war if Iraq did not comply and leave Kuwait voluntarily, yet the deadline for Iraqi withdrawal passed, and the coalition with the US started a large military campaign against Iraq.  Here Stein asks why compellence failed. She gives three reasons for this:

1. The US failed to implement an effective strategy of deterrence before the invasion of Kuwait.
2. Had Saddam Hussein correctly calculated the power balance, the war would have been avoided, that is, he miscalculated the resolve and the capabilities of the US.
3. Saddam just could not be deterred because he felt that the US was determined to  undermine his regime, and since he had that staunch image in his mind, neither compellence, deterrence, or reassurance would have worked on him.

## Failure to Deter
Under this subtopic, Stein gives the background to the Iraq/Kuwait war.  Iraq was repeatedly threatening the Gulf states, who Saddam thought were sabotaging Iraq by keeping oil prices too low.  Therefore, at a meeting in Jidda, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, UAE, and Qatar agreed to limit oil production to being oil prices up.  Kuwait, however, wanted to reverse it’s commitment to this agreement in the fall.  Iraq wanted billions of dollars from Kuwait as a form of compensation because of Kuwait’s over production of oil, Kuwait’s retrieval of oil from the disputed Rumaila oil field, etc.  As the conflict deepened, Washington’s signals were ambiguous to Iraq:  Ambassador Glaspie, the US ambassador to Iraq states she was very clear about the United States’ stand on the issue, stating she delivered “strong warnings to Saddam … against the use of threats.” The foreign minister of Iraq thought “she spoke in vague diplomatic language … and we were not influenced by it.”  Moreover, two days before the Iraqi invasion, the US had received news of increased military activity but still made no attempt at deterrence.  Therefore, Stein argues that the diplomacy of deterrence failed because it was incoherent, and confused.  Even if Saddam was deterrable, he would still have gone to war given Washington’s vague signals.  Again, she asks, if deterrence was properly executed, was the war preventable?  She states the answer lies in the assessment of Saddam’s motives and intentions.

## The motives and intentions of Saddam Hussein
Here, Stein states that there are two ways of looking at Saddam’s motives.
1. Saddam was an opportunity driven aggressor who had unquestioned military capability in the Gulf, plus sophisticated military technology.  The dispute with Kuwait was just an opportunity to for him to reclaim Kuwait and have a strong voice in the controlling of oil prices.
2. Saddam was driven by need due to the 8 year old war between Iraq and Iran and needed to make up for the immense debt and lost revenue.

Stein maintains that Saddam was
initially driven by the Iraq’s economic weakness
angered by Kuwait’s unwillingness for higher oil prices
frustrated with the Al-Sabah family in Kuwait for not giving him debt forgiveness.

Stein asserts that under these conditions if deterrence was properly used, and some attempt were made to refinance Iraq’s debt, war could have been prevented.

## Was an effective strategy of deterrence possible?

According to Stein, US would not have been able to deter Iraq forcefully because the members of the Policy Planning Staff were uncertain and divided about the American response to an Iraqi attack.  They thought that Saddam was engaging into coercive diplomacy and were unclear about his motives until the day of the Iraqi invasion in Kuwait.  They also felt uncertain about the Arab response and support to this and therefore, these factors made an effective strategy of deterrence virtually impossible.  Stein goes on to say that even if the US had created an effective strategy, it would have been hard to implement because Saddam strongly believed that the US was his unrelenting enemy and therefore, both deterrence and reassurance would have been very difficult if not impossible.

## Saddam’s View of the United States
Early in 1989 Iraqi foreign minister accused the United States of being hostile to Iraq because he claimed that the Iraqi government was told that the CIA was telling Iraqis in and outside of Iraq that Saddam’s regime had to be over thrown.  A few months later an editorial was aired by the Voice of America (VOA) which explicitly talked against Saddam’s oppressive regime. This editorial infuriated Saddam and according to Ambassador Glaspie, took it as “United States government sanctioned mudslinging with the intent to incite revolution.”Although the ambassador tried to rectify the situation, Saddam was not reassured, and did not find the clarifications made by her credible.  He also did not accept the disclaimer made by the publication which said that the editorial did not reflect American policy. After this in a speech he stated the US would exercise hegemonic power in the middle least if not challenged by the Arab governments. The assassination Gerrad Bull, Iraq’s artillery advisor, further made Saddam think that the US was conspiring against him.  This view of America conspiring against Iraq was consistent up until the attack on Kuwait.  Stein says that American attempts to reassure Saddam that there was no conspiracy against him were “uneven, unpersuasive, and ineffective.  Once he had this image set in his mind, reassurance and deterrence became virtually impossible.

## Could Saddam have been deterred?

Stein suggests if Saddam’s motivations were opportunistic, then deterrence would’ve had to be used forcefully.  If his motivations were driven by economic facts then a strategy of reassurance had to be used.  If the US was not clear about Saddam’s intentions, then a mixed strategy should have been used, showing support for Kuwait’s defense but also addressing Iraq’s pressing economic concerns.  In this section Stein reiterates the 3 factors that combined, may have contributed to the failure of deterrence and reassurance:  (1) The US had a poorly designed strategy that confused a fully rational adversary bent on expansion, (2) Saddam may have been driven by mixture of opportunity and need, and (3) he was viewing the issue in such a way that the choice was between open confrontation or long term sabotage.  She states that any one of these may have made deterrence and reassurance impossible but two factors here defeated compellence.

## The Failure of Compellence

The United States tried to implement coercive diplomacy against Iraq.  Daddy Bush, working with the UN, imposed strict embargos and economic sanctions against Iraq, assembled a large coalition, deployed a number of troops in Saudi Arabia, and set a deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.  Yet, Saddam ignored all this and the coalition went to war.  Stein says that the coercive diplomacy was carefully designed, and it’s failure cannot be chalked up to flawed strategy as the failure of deterrence that preceded the war.

The US did not want to engage in coercive diplomacy with Iraq.  In fact, the US wanted to trap Iraq in war because it wanted to destroy Saddam’s regime through war, and so the US withheld inducements necessary for Saddam to concede and withdraw Successful coercive diplomacy not only uses threat, it also uses inducement.  Counter argument:  Some powerful administrators wanted to go to war but there were also a large number of mediators present to give Saddam an honorable exit and also many UN resolutions that constrained the war policy.  French, Soviet, and Arab mediators made a series of proposals to Saddam which he rejected.  He also rejected negotiation opportunities with Gorbachev, Yasir Arafat, King Hussein of Jordan to name a few, so that war could be evaded, but he was not trapped into war.

In retrospect, Saddam did not want war, but preferred to war to unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.  Now this woman wants to talk about WHY Saddam ranked his preferences in this order.

Saddam’s calculations: There were a series of judgments that Saddam made in regards to the war. His most important judgments were political in nature:
1. He thought that America was not likely to go to war: even until the last moment, there was intense debate in the United States against the use of force.
2. Even if the US used force, Iraq would win a political victory over military defeat.

Although Saddam was continuously warned about the superior American military capability, he thought that Iraqi soldiers would be able to survive air and missile attacks from their superior staying power on the ground.  He underestimated air power but in the Iran/Iraq 8 year war, there was not much exposure to this form of attack.  Saddam also doubted that the US would able to withstand the large number of casualties from ground fighting. This was not unreasonable because analysts believed that we would have to fight from the ground no matter how successful the air attacks would be, and also that there would be a large amount of casualties.  Moreover, Saddam was convinced that the US would not have staying power.  He thought this b/c of an incident in Beirut when the US pulled out its marines from there after an attack on the marine compound in 1983.   Besides this he thought that the Arab countries that were US allies would not be able to survive the political consequences of going to war against him: he kept talking (in his speeches) about  a “jihad” against the “imperialist aggressors and their “agents.” Again, his estimation was not flawed because indeed, senior US officials were nervous about the reaction of the Arab allies of the US when they’d see images of western forces killing Iraqis.  Moreover, he hoped that Arab governments would not be able to survive the political consequences of being allied with the “Zionist Enemy.”  He also planned on attacking Israel which was also a major US concern.

These were some of the political and military judgments that Saddam made that made him stand firm about the war.  Besides his underestimation of the US air power, his views were widely shared by western analysts. These views were however wrong and contributed to the failure of coercive diplomacy.
